[move-2024] index syntax write-up (#16656)
MystenLabs/sui: external-crates/move/documentation/book/src/index-syntax.md

```
module matrix {

    public struct Matrix<T> { v: vector<vector<T>> }

    #[syntax(index)]
    public fun borrow<T>(s: &Matrix<T>, i: u64, j: u64):  &T {
        borrow(borrow(s.v, i), j)
    }

    #[syntax(index)]
    public fun borrow_mut<T>(s: &mut Matrix<T>, i: u64, j: u64):  &mut T {
        borrow_mut(borrow_mut(s.v, i), j)
    }

    public fun make_matrix<T>(v: vector<vector<T>>):  Matrix<T> {
        Matrix { v }
    }

}
```

Now anyone using this Matrix type has access to index syntax for it:

```
let v0 = vector<u64>[1, 0, 0];
let v1 = vector<u64>[0, 1, 0];
let v2 = vector<u64>[0, 0, 1];
let v = vector<vector<u64>>[v0, v1, v2];
let mut m = matrix::make_matrix(v);

let mut i = 0;
while (i < 3) {
    let mut j = 0;
    while (j < 3) {
        if (i == j) {
            assert!(m[i, j] == 1, i);
        } else {
            assert!(m[i, j] == 0, i + 10);
        };
        *(&mut m[i,j]) = 2;
        j = j + 1;
    };
    i = i + 1;
}
```

## Usage

As the example indicates, if a datatype defines an index syntax function, it may be used by
invoking index syntax on a value of that type:

```move
let mat = matrix::make_matrix(...);
let m_0_0 = mat[0, 0];
```

> During compilation, the compiler will translate these into the appropriate function invocations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During compilation, the compiler translates these into the appropriate function invocations
```

intricate programmatic behavior when using index syntax. For example, a data structure might wish to
take a default value if the index is out of bounds:

```
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_or_set<Key: copy, Value: drop>(
    input: &mut MTable<Key, Value>,
    key: &Key,
    default: Value
): &mut Value {
    if (contains(input, *key)) {
        borrow(input, key)
    } else {
        insert(input, *key, default)
        borrow(input, key)
    }
}
```

Indexing into `MTable` would then require the user provide a default value:

```
let string_key: String = ...;
let mut table: MTable<String, u64> = m_table::make_table();
let entry: &mut u64 = &mut table[string_key, 0];
```

This sort of extensible power allows developers to write precise index interfaces for their types,
concretely enforcing bespoke behavior.

## Defining Index Syntax Functions

This powerful syntax form allows for all user-defined datatypes to behave in this way, assuming they
adhere to the following rules:

1. The `#[syntax(index)]` attribute is added to the designated functions defined in the same module
   as the subject type.
2. The designated functions have `public` visibility.

> 3. The functions take a reference type as its "subject" type (its first argument) and returns a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The functions take a reference type as its subject type (its first argument) and returns a
```

   matching references type (`mut` if the subject was `mut`).
4. Each type has only a single mutable and single immutable definition.
5. Immutable and mutable versions have type agreement:
    - The subject types match, differing only in mutability.
    - The return types match the mutability of their subject types.
    - Type parameters, if present, have identical constraints between both versions.
    - All parameters beyond the subject type are identical.

These are described in greater detail, with additional examples, below.

### Declaration

> To declare an index syntax method, you add the `#[syntax(index)]` attribute above the relevant

Reviewer: Switching to second person here. I'd suggest using second person throughout (instead of "developers" or "users") but that can be addressed in a final pass. Adding this note so you can point out if you feel strongly one way or the other about the use of 2nd person.

function definition in the same module as the subject type's definition. This signals to the
compiler that the function is an index accessor for the specified type.

#### Immutable Accessor

> The immutable index syntax method is defined for read-only accesses. It takes an immutable reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The immutable index syntax method is defined for read-only access. It takes an immutable reference
```

of the subject type and returns an immutable reference to the element type. The `borrow` function
defined in `std::vector` is an example of this:

```move
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow<Element>(v: &vector<Element>, i: u64): &Element {
    // implementation
}
```

#### Mutable Accessor

The mutable index syntax method is the dual of the immutable one, allowing for both read and write

> operations. It takes a mutable reference of the subject type and returns an mutable reference to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operations. It takes a mutable reference of the subject type and returns a mutable reference to
```

the element type. The `borrow_mut` function defined in `std::vector` is an example of this:

```move
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_mut<Element>(v: &mut vector<Element>, i: u64): &mut Element {
    // implementation
}
```

#### Visibility

To ensure that indexing functions are available anywhere the type is used, all index syntax methods
must have public visibility. This ensures ergonomic usage of indexing across modules and packages in
Move.

#### No Duplicates

In addition to the above requirements, we restrict each subject base type to defining a single
index syntax method for immutable references and a single index syntax method for mutable

> references. For example, you may not define a specialized version for a polymorphic type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
references. For example, you cannot define a specialized version for a polymorphic type:
```

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_fst(x: &(u64, u64), ...): &u64 { ... }
    // ERROR because the subject type is a tuple

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_tyarg<T>(x: &T, ...): &T { ... }
    // ERROR because the subject type is a type parameter

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_value(x: Matrix<u64>, ...): &u64 { ... }
    // ERROR because x is not a reference
```

**The subject type must match mutability with the return type.** This restriction allows users to
clarify the expected behavior when they borrow an indexed expression as `&vec[i]` versus `&mut
vec[i]`. The Move compiler uses the mutability marker to determine which borrow form to call to
produce a reference of the appropriate mutability. As a result, we disallow index syntax methods
whose subject and return mutability differ:

```move
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_imm(x: &mut Matrix<u64>, ...): &u64 { ... }
    // ERROR! incompatible mutability

```

### Type Compatibility

When defining an immutable and mutable index syntax method pair, they are subject to a number of
compatibility constraints:

1. They must take the same number of type parameters, those type parameters must have the same
   constraints.

> 5. Type parameters must be used the same _by position_, not name.

Reviewer: I'd suggest just using 1s for ordered lists. Reader might get thrown off by the numbering sequence not being in order when list items get moved.

2. Their subject types must match exactly except for the mutability.
3. Their return types must match exactly except for the mutability.
4. All other parameter types must match exactly.
These constraints are to ensure that index syntax behaves identically
regardless of being in a mutable or immutable position.

> To illustrate some of these errors, recall the Matrix definition above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate some of these errors, recall the previous `Matrix` definition:
```

```move
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow<T>(s: &Matrix<T>, i: u64, j: u64):  &T {
    borrow(borrow(s.v, i), j)
}
```

All of the following are type-incompatible definitions of the mutable version:

```move
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_mut<T: drop>(s: &mut Matrix<T>, i: u64, j: u64):  &mut T { ... }
    // ERROR! `T` has `drop` here, but no in the immutable version

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_mut(s: &mut Matrix<u64>, i: u64, j: u64):  &mut u64 { ... }
    // ERROR! This takes a different number of type parameters

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_mut<T, U>(s: &mut Matrix<U>, i: u64, j: u64):  &mut U { ... }
    // ERROR! This takes a different number of type parameters

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_mut<T, U>(s: &mut Matrix<U>, i_j: (u64, u64)):  &mut U { ... }
    // ERROR! This takes a different number of arguments

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_mut<T, U>(s: &mut Matrix<U>, i: u64, j: u32):  &mut U { ... }
    // ERROR! `j` is a different type
```

Again, the gaol here is to make the usage across the immutable and mutable versions consistent. This

> allows index syntax methods to work without changing the behavior or constraints out based on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows index syntax methods to work without changing out the behavior or constraints based on
```

you to implement intricate programmatic behavior when defining index syntax, such as a data
structure that take a default value if the index is out of bounds:

```
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_or_set<Key: copy, Value: drop>(
    input: &mut MTable<Key, Value>,
    key: &Key,
    default: Value
): &mut Value {
    if (contains(input, *key)) {
        borrow(input, key)
    } else {
        insert(input, *key, default)
        borrow(input, key)
    }
}
```

Now, when you index into `MTable`, you must also provide a default value:

```
let string_key: String = ...;
let mut table: MTable<String, u64> = m_table::make_table();
let entry: &mut u64 = &mut table[string_key, 0];
```

This sort of extensible power allows you to write precise index interfaces for your types,
concretely enforcing bespoke behavior.

## Defining Index Syntax Functions

This powerful syntax form allows all of your user-defined datatypes to behave in this way, assuming
your definitions adhere to the following rules:

1. The `#[syntax(index)]` attribute is added to the designated functions defined in the same module
   as the subject type.

> 2. The designated functions have `public` visibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The designated functions have `public` visibility.
```
...and so on

references. For example, you cannot define a specialized version for a polymorphic type:

```move
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_matrix_u64(s: &Matrix<u64>, i: u64, j: u64): &u64 { ... }

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_matrix<T>(s: &Matrix<T>, i: u64, j: u64): &T { ... }
    // ERROR! Matrix already has a definition
    // for its immutable index syntax method
```

This ensures that you can always tell which method is being invoked, without the need to
inspect type instantiation.

### Type Constraints

By default, an index syntax method has the following type constraints:

**Its subject type (first argument) must be a reference to a single type defined in the same module
as the marked function.** This means that you cannot define index syntax methods for tuples,
type parameters, or values:

```move
#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_fst(x: &(u64, u64), ...): &u64 { ... }
    // ERROR because the subject type is a tuple

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_tyarg<T>(x: &T, ...): &T { ... }
    // ERROR because the subject type is a type parameter

#[syntax(index)]
public fun borrow_value(x: Matrix<u64>, ...): &u64 { ... }
    // ERROR because x is not a reference
```

> **The subject type must match mutability with the return type.** This restriction allows users to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The subject type must match mutability with the return type.** This restriction allows you to
```

> clarify the expected behavior when they borrow an indexed expression as `&vec[i]` versus `&mut

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clarify the expected behavior when borrowing an indexed expression as `&vec[i]` versus `&mut
```
